# Data Visualization: Moving Beyond The Norm
## Macklin Underdown  

My Senior Thesis provided a great opportunity to get into the field of data visualization, a field that I find interesting and hope to pursue in higher education. Data visualization is becoming much more relevant to society. Everyday, there is an exponential amount of data being generated and captured by companies around the world. With so much data that is unable to be understood by just looking at a spreadsheet, data visualization now plays a key role in learning about and understanding the massive amounts of data we deal with in today's technological age. In addition to this dilemma, websites like Twitter and Facebook, social media outlets for people, are in themselves a data source. How do we find alternative ways to deal with and take in the large amounts of data we are faced with today?

I explored this question throughout the semester as I learned about data visualization elements, which include the code, design, and ideas behind it. While I spent the majority of this thesis project working on learning how to code data visualizations and user interfaces in Processing, the end of this project leads me into the bigger realm of thinking about different approaches to experience data. 

The best example of this predicament is the Asteroids app that I created in Processing. It allows the user to search for a Twitter term or hashtag in real-time, and as those tweets happen, the user can interact with them like he/she is playing Asteroids from the Atari. This pseudo-game exploration of data led me into a direction of disgusing data visualizaiton into a game. In this way, the user takes on a more casual, playful approach to interacting with data visualizations. I received feedback from one user that she was found it to be a very fun way to view Twitter that broke away from the list of tweets that is found on the website, which confirms how a game-like exploration of data can be a beneficial approach to data visualization.

While building Asteroids, I thought about how game design could be influenced by historical or real-time data. It would be very exciting to be immersed in a game that reflected some sort of real events. I first started by developing some Processing classes called Weather and Today (located in the code/current folder) that would allow a developer to include real-time weather and time data into their sketch in a user friendly way, with first example I thought of being real-time weather data in the background environment of a game. This led to creating a game that actually used historical stock data to create the ground and ceiling for a helicopter game, which is an app called Helicopter. The user can select multiple levels where the ground and ceiling are drawn from two competing companies stock data over the course of their history in the stock market. This game provided an interesting, generative way to design games with currently existing public data. Not only could that data be related to the game experience itself, but any dataset could be used to create generative visuals or elements for gameplay, which is a very interesting concept that I would like to develop further as I continue to learn game design and code simple games.

The NorthAmericanMusic app is a sped up demo of the North American Music visualization that was on display for the April 2nd performance. This visualization was a challenge in synchronizing multiple locations across the globe in one simple Processing sketch, and that challenge provided better technical understanding of how to communicate between computers over the internet and UDP. The Interactive3DVisualization app was an exploration in beginning to understand 3D rendering and representation of data, as well as a study in creating usable and nice looking, homemade user interface objects. 

I would like to continue developing my programming skills as well as my design skills. The aesthetic of many of the apps is pretty minimal, and it would be great to continue exploring good approaches to design, in color choice, user interface elements, and what is presented to the user in the visualization. I would also like to continue working on documenting these and other coding projects to be able to allow a beginning to intermediate developer to learn from the work I have done, as teaching these and other concepts I have learned over the course of the term have definitely become more interesting to me as I've learned more about the field of data visualization and the creative approach I took to it by the end of the term.

